With millions of individuals becoming
victims of identity theft, each year,
billions of dollars lost and the amount of time
victims have to spend to rebuild their credit.
Identity theft is a menace that
is only getting bigger each day.
This module will explain what identity theft is
and how users can protect themselves from it.
This module will familiarize you with:
(1) identity theft; (2) social engineering; (3)
how to find if you are a victim of identity theft;
(4) what to do if identity is stolen;
(5) protecting from identity theft.
Identity Theft
What is Identity Theft? Individuals work
hard to support themselves or their family
they keep their credit card scores
clean and yearn for the benefits that
accompany good credit but they would
be really frustrated if someone else
uses their name to apply for credit cards run
bills of thousands of dollars using the card,
opens bank accounts in their name or
worse yet, commits a crime in their name.
Identity theft or Identity fraud refers to
crimes in which a person wrongfully obtains
key pieces of personal identifying information
such as date of birth, social security numbers,
and driver's license numbers, and uses them
for their own personal gain. Fraudsters
create a persona similar to the victim and take
advantage of his or her authority and privileges.
The Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of
2003 or FACTA defines identity theft as a fraud
committed using the identifying information
of another person. Identifying information
according to the Federal Trade Commission, is
another name or any number that may be used
alone or in combination with any other
information to identify a specific individual.
Identifying information includes name,
social security number, and date of birth.
Official state, or government issued driver's
license, or identification number, alien
registration number, government passport number,
and employer, or taxpayer identification number.
Unique biometric data such as fingerprint voice
print retina or iris image and other unique
physical representations. It may also include
unique electronic identification, number address,
or routing code, and lastly telecommunication
identifying information or access device.
Personal information that can be stolen are the
following: all identity thief needs is a piece of
personal information which may include
names, addresses, date of birth,
mother's maiden name, telephone numbers, social
security numbers, driver's license number,
credit card, or bank account numbers,
birth certificates and passport numbers.
So, how do attackers steal identity? There are two
methods: the first one is the physical methods.
First is stealing computers laptops and
backup media: stealing is a common method
the thieves steal hardware from places such as
hotels and recreational places such as clubs
or government organizations. Given adequate time,
they can recover valuable data from this media.
Social engineering: this technique is the act of
manipulating people's trust to perform certain
actions or divulge private information
without using technical cracking methods.
Next is Theft of personal belongings
Wallets or purses usually contain a
person's credit cards and driver's license
attackers may steal the belongings
on streets or in other busy areas.
Next is mail theft and rerouting: mail boxes
are not often protected and may contain bank
documents such as credit cards or account
statements, administrative forms and more.
Criminals may use this information to get credit
cards or for rerouting the mail to a new address.
next is shoulder surfing:
criminals may find user information by glancing
at documents personal identification numbers
typed into an automatic teller machine
or ATM, or overhearing conversations.
Skimming refers to stealing credit or debit
card numbers by using a special storage device
when processing the card. While pretexting, our
fraudsters may pose as executives from financial
institutions telephone companies and other sources
to obtain personal information of the user.
Another method in how attackers still identity is
the internet methods. Pharming is an advanced form
of phishing in which the connection between the
IP address and its target server is redirected.
The attacker may use cache poisoning or modify
the internet address with that of a rogue address
to do this. When the user types in the internet
address, he or she is redirected to the rogue
website that is similar to the original
website. Keyloggers and password stealers.
An attacker may infect the user's
computer with trojans and then collect it
such as keyword strokes to steal passwords,
usernames and other sensitive information.
Phishing. the fraudster may pretend to be
a financial institution or from a reputed
organization and sends spam or pop-up messages
to trick the users to reveal their personal
information. And last on the internet methods
is hacking, wherein attackers may compromise
user systems and route information using listening
devices such as sniffers and scanners. Attackers
gain access to an abundance of data decrypt
it if necessary and use it for identity theft.
What do attackers do with stolen identity? in
credit card fraud: the attackers may use the
information to route the mail to a new residential
address. The criminal may also use the information
to apply for a new credit card in the victim's
name and run high bills using the credit cards.
In phone or utilities fraud: the attacker
may apply for a new phone contract
or a wireless connection and run up
bills in user's name. They may also use
user information to obtain utility services
such as electricity, heating, or cable TV.
In bank or finance fraud: the attacker may
generate forged checks using the victim's name
or account number. They may also open a bank
account in the victim's name and write bad checks.
The criminal may also duplicate the user's ATM
or debit card and withdraw money thus depleting
the victim's bank resources and lastly the
attackers can also apply for bank loans.
In government documents fraud: the
attacker can obtain a driver's license,
state id and more, with the user's name and
the criminal's picture. They can also obtain
social security benefits and other government
benefits that rightfully belong to the user.
They may also file tax returns in a
user's name and obtain tax benefits.
Other frauds may include the following
such as acquiring a job using the
user's social security number or SSN, and listing
a house in the user's name. Social Engineering.
Social engineering is the art of convincing
people to reveal confidential information.
It is a trick used to gain sensitive
information by exploiting basic human nature.
Social engineers attempt to gather the
following: such as when criminals aim to
gather sensitive information such as credit card
details, social security number, passwords, and
other personal information, and more. The types
of social engineering includes the following:
human-based social engineering and
computer-based social engineering.
For human-based social engineering it is using
a direct interactions with key individuals
in an organization to exploit or manipulate people
into providing the confidential information.
These attacks mainly use impersonation
and its methods include the following:
eavesdropping, shoulder
surfing, and dumpster diving.
In human based social engineering, eavesdropping
is an unauthorized listening
of conversations or reading of
messages. It is the interception of any form of
communication such as audio video or written.
For shoulder surfing, it is a procedure
where the attacker look over the user's
shoulder to gain critical information such
as passwords, personal identification number,
account numbers, credit card information, and
more. For the dumpster diving, it includes
searching for sensitive information at the
target company's trash bins, printer trash bins
and user desk for sticky notes and more. Next
is the computer-based social engineering.
There are three methods of computer-based social
engineering which includes pop-up windows which
suddenly pop up while surfing the internet and
ask for users information to log in or sign up.
Hoax letters which are emails that issue warnings
to the user on new viruses trojans or worms that
may harm the user system, and lastly the chain
letters which are emails that offer free gifts
such as money and software on the condition
that the user has to forward the mail to the
said number of persons. Next is the instant chat
messenger wherein attackers use instant messaging
to gather personal information by chatting with
the selected online user to get information like
birth dates and media names. Lastly, spam email
which is irrelevant, unwanted, and unsolicited
email to collect financial information, social
security numbers, and network information.
Computer-based social engineering also includes
the following methods such as phishing which is
an illegitimate email falsely claiming to be from
a legitimate site that attempts to acquire the
user's personal information. Phishing emails
or pop-ups redirect users to fake web pages
of mimicking trustworthy sites that ask
them to submit their personal information.
Next is phony security alerts.
Phony security alerts are the emails or pop-up
windows that seem to be from required hardware
or software manufacturers like Microsoft,
Dell and more. It warns or alerts the user
that the system is infected and thus will provide
with an attachment or a link to patch the system.